  And who withholds my power that right to use?               380
  Shall I receive by gift what of my own,
  When and where likes me best, I can command?
  I can at will, doubt not, as soon as thou,
  Command a table in this wilderness,
  And call swift flights of Angels ministrant,
  Arrayed in glory, on my cup to attend:
  Why shouldst thou, then, obtrude this diligence
  In vain, where no acceptance it can find?
  And with my hunger what hast thou to do?
  Thy pompous delicacies I contemn,                           390
  And count thy specious gifts no gifts, but guiles."
    To whom thus answered Satan, male-content:--
  "That I have also power to give thou seest;
  If of that power I bring thee voluntary
  What I might have bestowed on whom I pleased,
  And rather opportunely in this place
  Chose to impart to thy apparent need,
  Why shouldst thou not accept it?  But I see
  What I can do or offer is suspect.
  Of these things others quickly will dispose,                400
  Whose pains have earned the far-fet spoil."  With that
  Both table and provision vanished quite,
  With sound of harpies' wings and talons heard;
  Only the importune Tempter still remained,
  And with these words his temptation pursued:--
    "By hunger, that each other creature tames,
  Thou art not to be harmed, therefore not moved;
  Thy temperance, invincible besides,
  For no allurement yields to appetite;
  And all thy heart is set on high designs,                   410
  High actions.  But wherewith to be achieved?
  Great acts require great means of enterprise;
  Thou art unknown, unfriended, low of birth,
  A carpenter thy father known, thyself
  Bred up in poverty and straits at home,
  Lost in a desert here and hunger-bit.
  Which way, or from what hope, dost thou aspire
  To greatness? whence authority deriv'st?
  What followers, what retinue canst thou gain,
  Or at thy heels the dizzy multitude,                        420
  Longer than thou canst feed them on thy cost?
  Money brings honour, friends, conquest, and realms.
  What raised Antipater the Edomite,
  And his son Herod placed on Juda's throne,
  Thy throne, but gold, that got him puissant friends?
  Therefore, if at great things thou wouldst arrive,
  Get riches first, get wealth, and treasure heap--
  Not difficult, if thou hearken to me.
  Riches are mine, fortune is in my hand;
  They whom I favour thrive in wealth amain,                  430
  While virtue, valour, wisdom, sit in want."
    To whom thus Jesus patiently replied:--
  "Yet wealth without these three is impotent
  To gain dominion, or to keep it gained--
  Witness those ancient empires of the earth,
  In highth of all their flowing wealth dissolved;
  But men endued with these have oft attained,
  In lowest poverty, to highest deeds--
  Gideon, and Jephtha, and the shepherd lad
  Whose offspring on the throne of Juda sate                  440
  So many ages, and shall yet regain
  That seat, and reign in Israel without end.
  Among the Heathen (for throughout the world
  To me is not unknown what hath been done
  Worthy of memorial) canst thou not remember
  Quintius, Fabricius, Curius, Regulus?
  For I esteem those names of men so poor,
  Who could do mighty things, and could contemn
  Riches, though offered from the hand of kings.
  And what in me seems wanting but that I                     450
  May also in this poverty as soon
  Accomplish what they did, perhaps and more?
  Extol not riches, then, the toil of fools,
  The wise man's cumbrance, if not snare; more apt
  To slacken virtue and abate her edge
  Than prompt her to do aught may merit praise.
  What if with like aversion I reject
  Riches and realms!  Yet not for that a crown,
  Golden in shew, is but a wreath of thorns,
  Brings dangers, troubles, cares, and sleepless nights,      460
  To him who wears the regal diadem,
  When on his shoulders each man's burden lies;
  For therein stands the office of a king,
  His honour, virtue, merit, and chief praise,
  That for the public all this weight he bears.
  Yet he who reigns within himself, and rules
  Passions, desires, and fears, is more a king--
  Which every wise and virtuous man attains;
  And who attains not, ill aspires to rule
  Cities of men, or headstrong multitudes,                    470
  Subject himself to anarchy within,
  Or lawless passions in him, which he serves.
  But to guide nations in the way of truth
  By saving doctrine, and from error lead
  To know, and, knowing, worship God aright,
  Is yet more kingly.  This attracts the soul,
  Governs the inner man, the nobler part;
  That other o'er the body only reigns,
  And oft by force--which to a generous mind
